# SQL Views

Views are a temporary output of data - a virtual table based on a `SELECT` query.

Rather than running the same `SELECT` statement multiple times, use a view. 'Cached statement output'.

```sql
CREATE VIEW Sales AS
SELECT sum(OrderDetails.Quantity * Products.Price) AS TotalCost, Orders.OrderId
FROM OrderDetails, Products, Orders
WHERE orders.OrderId = OrderDetails.OrderId
AND OrderDetails.ProductId = Products.Pr oductId
GROUP BY orders.OrderId;
```
```sql
SELECT * FROM "Sales";
```

Views are created each time they are invoked: the data returned will change as underlying data changes.

Can be used to limit access by only exposing relevant rows and columns to the end-user.

# SQL Transactions and Concurrency Control

## Transactions

A transaction is a logical unit of work composed of one or more SQL statement. All transactions must succeed so the the database is left in a consistent state.

Transactions can have a number of parts
- adjusting the product number after an order has taken place

Allows it to either complete a transaction or abort without having data errors.

Prevents only partial changes caused by interruptions such as a crash leaving the DB in a consistent state.

A transaction should continue until on of four events happens
- `COMMIT` 
- `ROLLBACK`
- End of program is reached
- Program is abnormally terminated

If the transaction fails because of a severe error, the SQL server will automatically rollback the transaction

If a runtime statement causes an error (constraint or rule violation), only the statement is rolled back.

All modifications performed by a committed transaction are permanent: you can't roll back. Resources used by the transaction are released.

```sql
CREATE PROCEDURE Delete_Customers(@CustomerId as INT)
AS
BEGIN
    BEGIN TRANSACTION
    DECLARE @Error NVARCHAR(Max);

    BEGIN TRY
        DELETE FROM Customers
        WHERE CustomerId = @CustomerId;

        IF @@TRANCOUNT > 0 COMMIT;
    END TRY

    BEGIN CATCH
        SET @Error = 'An error was encountered : Delete could not happen';

        IF @@TRANCOUNT > 0
            ROLLBACK TRANSACTION;
        RAISERROR(@Error, 1, 0);
    END CATCH;
END;
```

Atomicity
- All parts of a transaction must be completed or not performed at all
- A transaction might commit after completing all its actions, or it could abort (or be aborted by the DBMS) after executing some actions
- a user can think of a transaction as always executing all its actions in one step, or not executing any actions at all

Consistency
- Transaction must take the database from one consistent state to another. The database should be in a permanently consistent state

Isolation
- Transaction should appear as though it is being executed inisolation from other transactions
- data used during a transaction cannot be used by a second transaction until the first one has been completed

Serialisability
- The schedule for the concurrent execution of a number of transactions should yield consistent results

## Concurrency

Multiple users access databases and user computer system simultaneously. The DBMS will interleave actions of various transactions.

Coordination of simultaneous transactions execution in a multi-user database system

Main problems are lost updates, uncommitted data and inconsistent retrievals.

### Lock-based Concurrency Control

Mechanism to control concurrent access to a data object
- each element has a unique lock

Each transaction musst acquire the lock before read/writing that element, if the lock is taken by another transaction then wait.

The lock is released at the end of a transaction.

# SQL Triggers and Stored Procedures

## Triggers

Allows us to specify procedures and business logic that will run implicitly when a specific database event occurs.

`ON Sale UPDATE StockQuantity;`

Trigger an update to the quantity of a product after a sale happens.

If a quantity of a product falls below a certain amount, then an alert to reorder that product should occur.

```sql
CREATE TRIGGER ChangeStock ON OrderDetails
AFTER INSERT
AS
BEGIN
    IF UPDATE (Quantity)
    BEGIN
        UPDATE Products
        SET Products.Quantity = Products.Quantity - inserted.Quantity
        FROM inserted
        WHERE Products.ProductId = inserted.ProductId
    END
END;
```

## Stored Procedures

A piece of SQL code that can be saved and reused.

SQL script that is saved in the database.

Encapsulation of a specific action required by the application.

Provides security - uses parameters for input.

```sql
CREATE PROCEDURE ProductList AS
BEGIN
    SELECT ProductId, Product_Details, Price, Quantity
    FROM Products
    ORDER BY ProductID
END;
```
```sql
EXEC ProductList;
```

Stored procedures take values in & can output values indicated by the `@` symbol.

Parameters must be surrounded with opening & closing brackets and have the data type specified.

Multiple parameters can be listed.

```sql
CREATE PROCEDURE FindProductsInPriceRange(
    @TopRangePrice as FLOAT,
    @BottomRangePrice AS FLOAT
) AS

BEGIN
    SELECT Product_Details, Price, Quantity
    FROM Products
    WHERE Price >= @BottomRangePrice
    AND Price <= @TopRangePrice
    ORDER BY Price
END;
```
```sql
EXEC FindProductsInPriceRange @TopRanngePrice = 0.4, @BottomRangePrice = 0.1
```