# COMP2001 2024-10-08

- [coursework-briefing](#coursework-briefing)
- [cw1-overview](#cw1-overview)
- [implementation-logical-design-to-physical-database](#implementation-logical-design-to-physical-database)
    - [relational-database-advantages](#relational-database-advantages)
    - [relational-database-disadvantages](#relational-database-disadvantages)
    - [data-dictionary](#data-dictionary)
    - [considerations](#considerations)
    - [sql-server-table-definition](#sql-server-table-definition)
    - [entity-integrity](#entity-integrity)
    - [referential-integrity](#referential-integrity)
    
## Coursework Briefing

. | Submission Deadline | Feedback
--- | --- | ---
Set Exercises | 4/11/24 | 3/12/24
Report | 7/1/25 | 5/2/25

You must imagine yourself as part of a development team that is creating a data-driven application
that is made up of a number of interlinked micro-services. The exact topic of the micro-service is
given below.

There are several parts to the micro-service that you will need to create
- A set of tables to store the data in a relational database
- Stored procedures to manage the data (CRUD)
- A View to combine the data from different tables
- Sample data to illustrate the view working
- API endpoints for creating, reading, updating and deleting a given resource

The team is creating a well-being trail application. The location of the trails you use/create is your
choice.

> For people who wish to enjoy the outdoors, to enhance their wellbeing and to have a reason
to explore a particular area, the Trail App is a full trail management application providing a
reason to explore a given area.

User Stories
- As an administrator I wish to create a new trail with information
- As an administrator I wish to check that a new trail with information exists
- As an administrator I wish to edit the information for an existing trail
- As an administrator  I wish to delete an existing trail
- As a user of the trail app I wish to select and view a particular trail using my Android mobile device

The application must use the existing Authenticator API found at https://web.socem.plymouth.ac.uk/COMP2001/auth/api/users

The following accounts must be used in the application. These accounts exist in the authenticator
API application. The roles that these users hold is to be held in the Trail App.

User Name | Email | Password
--- | --- | ---
Grace Hopper | grace@plymouth.ac.uk | ISAD123!
Tim Berners-Lee | tim@plymouth.ac.uk | COMP2001!
Ada Lovelac | ada@plymouth.ac.uk | insecurePassword

## CW1 Overview

Carry out an analysis of the micro-service, identify the appropriate data items, design and then create the SQL that will store the data appropriately and preserve the integrity of the data. You are to implement your design by deploying your SQL to your allocated Microsoft SQL Server database running on `dist-6-505.uopnet.plymouth.ac.uk`.

Create an initial Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD) for your micro-service. *Provide this, clearly labelled, in an Appendix to your report.*

---

## Implementation: Logical Design to Physical Database

### Relational Database Advantages

- Removal of redundancy
- Shareability
    - Applications can share databases
    - Users can share data, incl. remotely
- Security
    - Access rights can be imposed
- Reliability
    - Protection of data against loss/damage/destruction
- Speed
    - Database tools allow speedy application development
- Data independence
    - Structure seperate from programmes
- Integrity
    - Maintenance of high quality, correct and consistent data
- Cost
    - Reduced costs for systems development and maintenance
- Query Language Support

### Relational Database Disadvantages

Complexity
- Requires experts to design, develop and maintain them, and
some training for users
- Initial cost
    - Retraining, expensive software, specialised hardware
- Complexity
    - May require multiple databases to satisfy requirements
- All or nothing
    - If system crashes, none of the applications may run

Analysis issues
- Choosing an initial key
    - Choose what is obvious
- Documentation

### Data Dictionary

- A data dictionary should specify as many of the properties as is
considered relevant
- This should be applicable in any software or programming
language
- Particular care should be used to indicate primary & foreign
keys

### Considerations

> Determining the Data type

> How big must the field be in order to hold the required data?

> Precision & Scale of numbers (number of significant digits/digits after decimal point)

> What are the possible data values?

> Must a value always be present?

> What rules could/should be applied on data entry? => Validation 

### SQL Server Table Definition

Use meaningful table and column names

Primary and foreign keys are defined where applicable

# Database Integrity

Domain
- A pool of allowable values from which the real values are drawn

Entity
- Ensures no attribute of a primary key can be null. 
- The primary key is unique.
- Every table must have a primary key.

Referential
- Ensures where a foreign key exists in a table, the foreign key value must match a candidate (usually a primary key) of a row in the home table or be completely NULL.

Semantic
- Ensures application constraints applied or that business rules are obeyed.

Use SQL to implement integrity by using *constraints*.

Column constraints must apply to only one column. Table constraints can apply to one or more columns.

- `UNIQUE`
- `NOT NULL`
- `CHECK`

### Entity Integrity

- every real world 'thing' about which data needs to be maintained in an application must be represented by a relation in the model
- every set of properties about a real world occurrence of the 'thing' must be uniquely identifiable
- every row (tuple) in a relation must have a unique-valued primary key
- primary key attributes must not be null

### Referential Integrity

Every non-null value that exists in a detail (foreign) key attribute must also exist in the relation for which it is the master key

Restrict 
- ban alterations to the master value while detail references still exist
- `ON DELETE/ON UPDATE NOACTION`

Cascade
- effect the alteration on all values in (detail) rows referenced by the original value (e.g. Triggers)
- DANGEROUS; data is gone forever!
- `ON DELETE/ON UPDATE CASCADE`

Set to `null` 
- allow alteration in the master value but set all values in detail rows to null
- `ON DELETE/ON UPDATE SET NULL`

# Setting up a Docker Container and SQL Server

```cmd
docker run -e "ACCEPT_EULA=1" -e "MSSQL_SA_PASSWORD=C0mp2001!" -p 1433:1433 --name COMP2001sqlserv -d mcr
.microsoft.com/azure-sql-edge
```
```cmd
docker ps
````

> If the container has the status of ‘exit’ (rather than actively ‘running’) on the Docker dashboard, you will need to delete the container - prior to rerunning the script on the terminal.

On Azure Data Studio, click the Connections icon at the top of the screen and create a new connection.

```
Server : localhost
Authentication type : SQL Login
User name : SA
Password : C0mp2001!
(given in code above)
Name : localhost-sqlserv
```

Open up a new query window and type the following command.
```sql
CREATE database COMP2001_Test;
```
