# Cryptography

Interception
- A message may be obtained and read by a third party (MITM), affecting *confidentiality*.

Modification or Substitution
- A message could be altered or entirely replaced, affecting *integrity*.

Blocking
- The message may be blocked, affecting *availability*.

Plaintext and Ciphertext

Cryptology = Cryptography + Cryptanalysis

Transposition
- Symbols in plaintext are moved into different positions in the cipher text

Substitution
- Symbols in plaintext are replaced in the cipher text

Concealment
- Additional symbols are oaced in the cipher text to conceal the contents

## Matrix Transposition

> Transposition

`THISISASECRETMESSAGE`

$$
\begin{bmatrix}
T & H & I & S & I \\
S & A & S & E & C \\
R & E & T & M & E \\
S & S & A & G & E \\
\end{bmatrix}
$$

`TSRSHAESISTASEMGICEE`

`YOU ARE GOOD`

$$
\begin{bmatrix}
Y & O & U & A \\
R & E & G & O \\
O & O & D &  \\
\end{bmatrix}
$$

`YROOEOUGDAO`

## Ceasar Cipher

> Substitution

$C=E(M) + K \,\,\, (\mod 26 \,\,\,)$

## Cryptanalysis

It's always assumed the attacker knows the cipher being used but does not know the key.

### Brute Force 

It would take a maximum of 25 attempts to brute force a Caesar Cipher; small keyspace.

### Statistical Analysis

Spaces in cipertext give sentence structure.

Guess repeated characters; letter frequency distribution.

## Cryptographic Techniques

### Product Ciphers

Combine two or more basic methods; strong ciphers from weak methods.

### One-Time Pad

A key sequence at least as long as the plain text.

It is a perfect cipher system in the sense that no matter how much computational power you have, you cannot break the cipher text.

Difficult to use in applications which consume a large amount of key material.

Only provides condifentiality, not data integrity.

> Requires the use of a single-use pre-shared key that is larger than or equal to the size of the message being sent. <br>
> In this technique, a plaintext is paired with a random secret key (also referred to as a one-time pad). Then, each bit or character of the plaintext is encrypted by combining it with the corresponding bit or character from the pad using modular addition.[1]

> The problems of secure key distribution make them impractical for most applications.