# VLANs

- Virtual LANs (VLANs)
    - Purpose
    - Functionality
    - Configuration
        - VLAN Port Assignment
        - Trunking
        - Dynamic Trunking Protocol
    - Security Features
- InterVLAN Routing
    - Concept and Configuration

---

## Virtual LANs (VLANs)

A VLAN is a logical group of network stations and devices.

Each VLAN is a seperate logical network, used to provide grouping for different users (regardless of physical location).

> "logical" refers to an abstract grouping.

Packets for other VLANs must be forwarded through a routing device. 

Each VLAN is a seperate broadcast domain.

Can be used to group different job roles:
- Engineering Department User -> Engineering VLAN
- Marketing Department User -> Marketing VLAN
- ...even though they may be working in the same office.

Access to different (role specific) resources, different security rulesets, improved data flow.

### VLAN Benefits

Security
- Groups which have sensitive data are seperated from the rest of the network, decreasing the chances of confidential information breaches.

Cost Reduction
- Reduced need for upgrades, efficient usage of bandwidth and uplinks.

Better Performance
- Reduce unnecessary traffic on the network

Shrink Broadcast Domains
- Dividing a network into VLANs reduces the number of devices in the broadcast domain, reducing the overall volume of broadcast traffic, including ARP requests.
- > Since ARP requests are broadcast packets, they are sent to all devices within the same broadcast domain or VLAN. Consequently, in networks with large broadcast domains, ARP traffic can become a significant source of broadcast traffic.

Improved IT Staff Efficiency
- Easier to manage the network because users with similar network requirements share a VLAN.

### VLAN Types

Data VLAN
- Designated for user generated traffic such as data communication between devices on the network.

Voice VLAN
- Used for IP telephony or VoIP traffic.
- Seperate voice traffic from other data traffic to prioritise and ensure high-quality voice communication.

Default VLAN (VLAN1)
- VLAN1 is the default VLAN on many switches.
- All ports initially get allocated to VLAN1 unless configured otherwise.
- Often carries general user traffic and management traffic.

Native VLAN
- Associated with *trunk ports*, which carry traffic for multiple VLANs.
- Carried *untagged* traffic across the trunk link.
- Any untagged frames received on the trunk port are assumed to belong to the native VLAN.

Management VLAN
- Used for managing the switch itself.
- Typically hosts management interfaces such as the Switch Virtual Interface (SVI) for remote access and configuration.
- Often set to VLAN1 by default.

### VLAN Trunks

A point-to-point link between two network devices that carry more than one VLAN.

VLAN trunks are capable of transporting traffic for multiple VLANs over a single physical connection. This enables the aggregation of traffic from different VLANs onto a single trunk link.

VLAN trunks typically establish point-to-point connections between network devices, such as switches or routers. This means that the trunk link directly connects two devices, allowing for the efficient exchange of VLAN-tagged traffic.

### Frame Tagging

Each frame is tagged with the VLAN it belongs to. Trunking enables switches to efficiently transport traffic for multiple VLANs over a single physical link.

Frame Tagging techniques have been adopted by the IEEE for standardisation, ensuring interoperability between networking devices from different vendors.

Allows for faster delivery time of frames.

### VLAN Tag Fields

Tag
- Tag Protocol ID
- 2 byte value to indicate the presence of a VLAN tag in the Ethernet Frame.
- Hexadecimal format: `0x8100`

User Priority
- 3 bit value used to prioritise traffic within a VLAN.
- Supports Quality Of Service (QoS) implementations by enabling different levels of service for different types of traffic.

Canonical Format Identifier (CFI)
- 1 bit value used in Token Ring networks.
- In Ethernet frames, this bit is repurposed as part of the VLAN tag structure.
- It indicates whether the frame is Ethernet `0` or Token Ring `1` format.

VLAN ID
- A 12 bit field that identifies the VLAN that the frame belongs to.
- Allows for up to 4096 VLANs, enabling segmentation of network traffic into seperate broadcast domains.

After the switch inserts the Type and tag control information fields into the Ethernet frame, it recalculates the Frame Check Sequence (FCS) value and inserts the new FCS into the frame. The FCS is used for error detection and ensures the integrity of the frame during transmission.

### Dynamic Trunking Protocol (DTP)

`switchport mode access`
- Configures the interface to operate in permanent non-trunking mode.
- Disables DTP negotiation on the interface, ensuring it remains a non-trunk interfaces regardless of the neighbouring interface's configuration.

`switchport mode dynamic auto`
- When set to dynamic auto mode, the interface is capable of automatically negotiating with its neighbour to become a trunk link.
- If the neighboring interface is configured as a trunk or desirable mode, the interface will become a trunk interface. 
- This is the default switchport mode.

`switchport mode dynamic desirable`
- In dynamic desirable mode, the interface actively attempts to negotiate with its neighbour to become a trunk link. 
- It sends DTP frames to request trunking, and if the neighboring interface responds with `trunk`, `desirable`, or `auto` mode, the interface will become a trunk interface.

`switchport mode trunk`
- This command sets the interface to permanent trunking mode. 
- It removes the need for negotiation with the neighbouring interface.
- Even if the neighbouring interface is not configured as a trunk, this interface will become a trunk interface.

`switchport nonegotiate`
- This command disables Dynamic Trunking Protocol (DTP) frames on the interface, preventing it from generating DTP frames. 
- It can only be used when the interface switchport mode is access or trunk. 
- When used, the neighbouring interface must be manually configured as a trunk interface to establish a trunk link.

## InterVLAN Routing

InterVLAN routing is the process of forwarding traffic between different VLANs within a network. In networks where VLANs are implemented, each VLAN operates as a separate broadcast domain, and devices within the same VLAN can communicate with each other directly. However, if communication is required between devices in different VLANs, interVLAN routing is necessary.

InterVLAN routing is performed by a router or a Layer 3 switch. These devices have the capability to route traffic between different VLANs by forwarding packets based on their destination IP addresses.