# Cyber Security Fundamentals

## Defining Security

Computer security is the protection of a companys assets by ensuring the safe, uninterrupted operation of the system and the safeguarding of its computer, programs and data files.

Information security is the protection of information from a wide range of threats in order to ensure business continuity, minimize business risk, and maximize return on investments and business opportunities.

Cybersecurity relies on information security, application security, network security, and Internet security as fundamental building blocks. Cybersecurity is one of the activities necessary for CIIP, and, at the same time, adequate protection of critical infrastructure services contributes to the basic security needs (i.e., security, reliability and availability of critical infrastructure) for achieving the goals of Cybersecurity.

## CIA Triad
### Basic Cybersecurity Requirements

- Confidentiality
- Integrity
- Availability

### COMP1004 Project

*ArrowTrack:*

Allows archers and archery clubs to database and maintain their equipment by tracking fields such as item, price, condition, etc.

**C:** Data should only be accessed by authenticated and authorised users.

**I:** Only the authorised user should be able to add/update/remove from their database.

**A:** ?

## Parkerian Hexad

- Confidentiality
- Integrity
- Availability
- Utility
- Authenticity
- Control / Possession

### CIA AAA

- Confidentiality
- Integrity
- Availability
- Authentication (Identity)
- Authorisation (Permissions)
- Accounting (Track what logged in users are doing)

Information security: The preservation of confidentiality, integrity and availability of information. In addition, other properties such as authenticity, accountability, *non-repudiation* and reliability can also be involved

> Nonrepudiation provides proof of the origin, authenticity and integrity of data. It provides assurance to the sender that its message was delivered, as well as proof of the sender's identity to the recipient. This way, neither party can deny that a message was sent, receivEconomy of mechanism: Keep the design as simple and small as possible.

## Saltzer and Schroder's Design Principles

*Fail-safe defaults:* Base access decisions on permission rather than exclusion.

*Complete mediation:* Every access to every object must be checked for authority.

*Open design:* The design should not be secret.

*Separation of privilege:* Where feasible, a protection mechanism that requires two keys to unlock it is more robust and flexible than one that allows access to the presenter of only a single key.

*Least privilege:* Every program and every user of the system should operate using the least set of privileges necessary to complete the job.

*Least common mechanism:* Minimize the amount of mechanism common to more than one user and depended on by all users.

*Psychological acceptability:* It is essential that the human interface be designed for ease of use, so that users routinely and automatically apply the protection mechanisms correctly.

*Work factor:* Compare the cost of circumventing the mechanism with the resources of a potential attacker.

*Compromise recording:* It is sometimes suggested that mechanisms that reliably record that a compromise of information has occurred can be used in place of more elaborate mechanisms that completely prevent loss.ed and processed.

## Contributing Disciplines of Information Security

Business 
- appreciating the organisational context in which protection is required, and the importance of security in areas such as maintaining brand reputation, supporting business continuity, and minimising business risk

Economics 
- understanding the value of security controls relative to costs of exposure, and linking to factors such as return on (security) investment (ROI)

Education 
- supporting areas such as user awareness and training, each being steps towards the boarder goal of achieving a security culture amongst the staff community

Law 
- recognising the laws that require us to preserve security, and those relevant in response to incidents; linking to criminology in relation to understanding the nature and motivation of attackers

Mathematics 
- providing the underpinnings for a variety of security techniques, including cryptography and access control

Psychology 
- helping us to understand how users perceive issues such as security and trust; predicting how users may behave in risk scenarios and factors that may influence their responses