# Introduction, Software Development Lifecycle

Module Aims
- Explore software development best practices such as usability, unit testing, TDD, version control and quality management
- Create appropriate test plans and test cases making use of modern testing tools and processes
- Examine a variety of techniques to evaluate a given UI

## SDLC

- Analysis/Specification
- Design
- Implementation
- Verification and Validation
- Evolution

The key reason behind adopting a clear Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) model is to add control over the development process so as to complete a successful production of the software.

## Waterfall Model

The Waterfall model is a sequential approach, where each fundamental activity of the process is represented as a separate phase, arranged in linear order.

- Requirements, System Design, Implementation & Unit Testing, Integration & System Testing, and Operation & Maintenance

## Integration Testing

- It tests the interface between modules of the software. The different modules are first individually tested in isolation (unit testing: an automated piece of code that checks another automated piece of code) and then combined, one by
one, to make a system.

## System Testing

- It tests the software at the final stage as a whole by combining all the product modules. The primary aim of conducting this test is that it must fulfill the customer-user requirement specification.
- End-to-End testing
- Test functional and non-functional requirements

1. Functional testing (testing against the functional requirements specifications)
2. Non-functional testing (e.g., load testing, usability testing, etc)
3. Load testing
4. Regression testing (new code changes do not have side effects on the existing functionalities)
5. Recovery testing (ability to recover "operations can be continued" from failures like software/hardware crashes)

## Usability Testing

Having verified that the system functions correctly it is important to check that it also fulfils the user's requirements.

- Devise test cases based on user requirements
- Observe the system in use
- Important that a sound process is used – not just watching someone use the system
- Particularly important w.r.t. HCI and user interface design - is it an intuitive and easy-to-use UI?
- Useful for testing prototypes
