# Introduction to AI

- Module Introduction
- Introduction to Artificial Intelligence

Optimization, Machine Learning, Knowledge Representation, Reasoning, Natural Language Processing, Ethical and Social Considerations

- Week 1: Introduction to AI
- Week 2: Machine Learning
- Week 3: Neural networks
- Week 4: Deep Learning
- Week 5: Evolutionary Computation
- Week 6: Multi-objective Optimisation
- Week 7: Knowledge Representation
- Week 8: Agents
- Week 9: Natural Language Processing
- Week 10: Reinforcement Learning
- Week 11: Evaluating AI and XAI
- Week 12: Getting prepared to write your dissertation


Set Exercise (30%)
- 2025-03-03
- 40% Blog Post
- 60% Poster

Report (70%)
- 2025-03-31 (before Easter break)
- Coding Based
- Applying ML algorithms to a dataset
- Applying optimisation methods to test functions

Choice between Python (Jupyter Notebook) and R (:laughing:)


- 1943: McCulloch and Pitts propose basis of neural networks
- 1950: The Turing test is proposed
- 1955: Computer Scientist John McCarthy coins the term "AI"
- 1964: MIT-developed chatbot ELIZA holds its first conversations
- 1997: IBM’s Deep Blue defeats Garry Kasparov
- 2011: Siri launched and IBM Watson wins "Jeopardy"
- 2014: Eugene Goostman "passes" the Turing Test and Alexa launched
- 2017: AlphaGo beats world champion Ka Jie

> Garbage In, Garbage Out

## Examples of AI

### Natural Language Processing

Sentiment Analysis
- The true meaning behind our words is difficult for a computer to understand.
- Jokes and sarcasm

### Computer Vision

The brain uses information from your eyes to process visual information.

Computer Vision takes information from cameras and performs the same task using Machine Learning.

- Image analysis
- Autononous vehicles
- Fraud detection

### Self-driving Cars

Cars that can get from A to B with no human control.

- Navigation
- Understand their environment; spot hazards, recognise and understand traffic signs
- Could be safer
- Transport options; accessibility

## Turing Test

A person has a conversation with an AI and another human.

They pass the same message to each entity without knowing which is which - human or AI.

They must judge which is which based on their responses alone.

## Searle's Chinese Room

An AI is said to understand Chinese, and passes the Turing Test.

Does the AI *understand* Chinese, or has it got a simulated understanding?

A **person** could follow rules and generate response phrases without true understanding too.

Strong and Weak AI, actual versus simulated understandings.

## Ethics

- Who is responsible if an AI harms someone?
- Can AI discriminate?

Epistemic Strategies
- Reduce uncertainty around AI
- Transparent or explainable AI

Technical Strategies
- Make AI safer and error free
- Align AI to human values and ensure overall human control

Moral Strategies
- Allay fears that there are ethical issues with AI

People could be warned that they are interacting with AI; red flags.

AI should be explainable to a non-expert audience.

> Obamna

1. Explain how the AI has produced a model
2. Explain individual predictions
3. Explain model behaviour
4. Explain with representative examples
