# COMP1001 Computer Systems
# 2023-10-05 Introduction to Assembly I

---

## Why Assembly is used

- Security
    - Make Viruses
    - Reverse engineering to identify software flaws
- Making compilers, hardware drivers, processors
- Optimising software 
    - Executing time
    - Energy usage

> 90/10 Rule
> - 90% of execution time is from 10% of the code
> - i.e. RAPDM

## Why Assembly isn't used

- Development time
- Reliability and security
- Debugging is tricky
- Maintainability issues 
- Not portable

## x86, x64, IA-32

x86
- Originated from a 16-bit processor
- Now refers to a 32-bit processor compatible with the x86 instruction set

x64
- General name of 64-bit processors
- Equivalent to x86-64
- Compatible with x86

> 64-bit processors were introduced to bypass the 4GB memory limitation of 32-bit processors due to not enough bits to address each memory cell.

> $2^{32} = 2^2 * 2^{30} = 4 * \text{Gigabytes}$ <br>
> $2^{64} = 2^4 * 2^{60} = 16 * \text{Exabytes}$

## Assembly

```asm
; A simple example adding two numbers.
.386  ; Specify instruction set
.model flat, stdcall  ; Flat memory model, std. calling convention
.stack 4096 ; Reserve stack space
ExitProcess PROTO, dwExitCode: DWORD  ; Exit process prototype

.data ; data segment
	; define your variables here
  sum DWORD 0  ; define a variable sum (32-bit) with initial value 0
  
.code ; code segment

main PROC ; main procedure
	; write your assembly code here
  mov eax, 25 ; move literal value 25 to eax
  mov ebx, 30 ; move literal value 30 to ebx
  add eax, ebx  ; add eax and ebx, and put value in eax
  mov sum, eax  ; move eax value to sum
	INVOKE ExitProcess, 0 ; call exit function
  
main ENDP ; exit main procedure
END main  ; stop assembling
```

> Ensure build target is set to `x86` before building

Visual Studio Debug - Registers:
```
EAX = 00000019
EBX = 0000001E
EAX = 00000037
```

$$(1*16) + (9*1) = 25$$
$$(1*16) * (14*1) = 30$$
$$(3*16) * (7*1) = 55$$

### Reserved Words

> Predefined purpose

> Cannot be used in any other way, such as variable names

> Case-insensitive, `mov` == `Mov` == `MOV`

### Directives

> Assembler specific commands

> Directs the assembler to do *something*

```asm
.data
sum DWORD 0
```

`DWORD` asks the assembler to reserve 32-bits of memory and write the literal `42`.

`.386` enables the 80386 processor instructions

`.model` sets the memory model, `FLAT` for 32-bit instructions, `stdcall` for Assembler instructions

### Program Sections

Special sections pre-defined by the assembler

`.data`, `.code`

### Labels

Labels allow us to partition code for programmatic (e.g. jumping and looping), or design purposes (e.g. clarity). Used in `.code` section.

### Literals

`31` decimal values do not need a radix specifier <br>
`00011111b` `b` is the radix specifier for binary <br>
`31d` `d` is the radix character for decimal <br>
`1Fh` `h` is the radix character for hexadecimal <br>
`37o` `o` is the radix character for octal

Radix | Base
---   | ---
`b` | Binary (2)
`d` | Decimal (10)
`h` | Hexadecimal (16)
`q`, `o` | Octal (8)

BYTE – 8bit unsigned integer <br>
SBYTE – 8bit signed integer <br>
WORD - 16bit unsigned integer <br>
SWORD - 16bit signed integer <br>
DWORD - 32bit unsigned integer <br>
SDWORD - 32bit signed integer <br>
QWORD – 64bit unsigned integer <br>
REAL4 – single precision floating point numbers (32bit) <br>
REAL8 - double precision floating point numbers (64bit) <br>

## Variables vs Registers

A variable is not a register. A variable is a high-level language construct to ease the development process. Each variable is stored somewhere in memory (the assembler decides this). We can define as many variables we want. On the contrary, the number of registers is limited. If we need to load the datum of a variable (e.g., by using mov eax, sum instruction), then the 'sum' variable will be loaded from memory, which is a slow operation. On the contrary, registers are accessed directly (there is no overhead).

```asm
mov eax, 25 ; move literal value 25 to 32-bit register eax
mov ebx, 30 ; move literal value 30 to 32-bit register ebx
add eax, ebx ; add eax and ebx, and put value in eax
mov sum, eax ; move the eax register value to sum variable. The sum variable is stored into memory
```

## Task 1

```asm
var1 SWORD 10000h ; needs 16 signed bits
var2 SBYTE ; needs 8 signed bits
``` 
:x:

```asm
.data ; data segment
	; define your variables here
	sum DWORD 10000h ; needs 17 bits so use 32 bit signed datatype
	var2 BYTE ? ; needs 8 bits, ? indicates uninitialised
```
:heavy_check_mark:

> All the data variables are defined after the '.data' command. We will choose the size of the variable (or register to use) according to their contents size. '0x10000' is a hexadecimal number because it starts with '0x'. You can use the windows calculator (programmer view) to see its decimal and binary equivalent. This number requires 17 bits (each hex digit needs up to 4 bits). The available data types are 8bit, 16bit, 32bit and 64 bit. Therefore, we need the 32 bit data type for holding this value.
