# Android Studio

- Native (COMP2000 focus)
    - Built specifically for one OS, utilising that platforms specific development language.
    - Android apps are developed using Java or Kotlin
    - iOS apps are developed using Swift or Obj-C
    - This gives full access to device features, high performance and smooth UI
- Web
    - Mobile optimised websites that look and function similarily to native apps, but run in the browser
    - HTML, CSS, JS
    - Limited access to device features and typically requires an internet connection
- Hybrid
    - A blend of Native and Web, utilises a web view within a native shell
    - Cross platform code reuse with some access to device features
- Cross-Platform
    - Frameworks that allow developers to build applications for multiple platforms using a single codebase
    - Flutter (Dart), React Native (JavaScript)
    - Reduces development time and cost by sharing code across platforms, whilst keeping access to native features

Android Architecture
- Applications Layer
    - Top layer, where user installe applications exist
    - Apps that the users directly interact with
- Application Framework
    - Toolkit for developers
    - Offers a set of APIs that applications utilise
    - Allows reuse of core components, reducing development time
    - Components:
        1. Activity Manager
        2. Content Providers
        3. Resource Manager
        4. View System
- Android Runtime (ART)
    - Responsible for executing Android applications
    - Replaced the older Dalvik VM for enhanced performance
    - Components:
        1. Core Libraries
        2. Ahead-of-Time (AOT) Compilation
- Platform Libraries
    - Consists of C/C++ libraries
    - Graphics rendering, database access, web browsing
    - SQLite, OpenGL, WebKit
- Linux Kernel
    - Foundation of Android OS
    - Low level functionalities and hardware abstraction
    - Components
        1. Memory Management
        2. Process Management
        3. Networking
        4. Device Drivers

Android apps are written using Kotlin or Java languages.

Android SDK tools compile code, data and resource files into an APK, or Android App Bundle.

Android SDK contains compiler, debugger and a device emulator.

Each Android application runs in a 'sandbox environment', isolated from other apps.

The Linux Kernel treats each app as a seperate user by assinging a unique Linux User ID to each app.

Each app runs in its own virtual machine (ART), code executes independently. Isolation enhances security and stability.

