# Hash Tables

Hash tables store data from a large search space in a smaller table; e.g. a phone book.

Access to the data is through *keys* that map to the data.

### Hash Functions

A hash function takes a string (or some other type of data) as input and returns an array index as output. 

In order for it to return an array index, our hash map implementation needs to know the size of our array. If the array we are saving values into only has 4 slots, our hash map's hashing method should not return an index bigger than that.

In order for our hash map implementation to guarantee that it returns an index that fits into the underlying array, the hash function will first compute a value using some scoring metric: this is the hash value, hash code, or just the hash.

Our hash map implementation then takes that hash value mod the size of the array. This guarantees that the value returned by the hash function can be used as an index into the array we're using.

Hash functions are also known as compression functions.

```
hash_value = (# of lowercase 'a's in album name) + 
             (# of number of lowercase 'e's in album name)

hash_value mod 4
```

Album Name             | Hash |	Hash mod 4 | Release Year
---                    | ---  | ---        | ---
The Low End Theory     | 2    | 2          | 1991
Midnight Marauders     | 3    | 3          | 1993
Beats, Rhymes and Life | 5    | 1          | 1996
The Love Movement      | 4    | 0          | 1998

### Collisions


Because of this compression, it's likely that our hash function might produce the same hash for two different keys; this is known as a hash collision. 

There are several strategies for resolving hash collisions.

There are different hash collision strategies. Two important ones are separate chaining, where each array index points to a different data structure, and open addressing, where a collision triggers a probing sequence to find where to store the value for a given key.

---

## Look-up Tables

Tables that store data that is expensive to compute.

Look-up tables can be computed offline, during program initialisation or on-the-fly.

For a function $f(n)$, the lookup table could just be all of the values that of $n$ that the function has already encountered and calculated.

Re-computation can be avoided in time-critical applications.

*Memoization:*
> In computing, memoization or memoisation is an optimization technique used primarily to speed up computer programs by storing the results of expensive function calls to pure functions and returning the cached result when the same inputs occur again.

## Indexed Retrieval

An array holding sorted keys sometimes falls into natural selections.

For alphabetically sorted data:
- `A`
    - `AA`
    - `AB`
    - `AC`
    - etc.
- `B`
    - ...
- `C`
    - ...
- etc.

We can use an index array of start positions.


