# COMP1000 Software Engineering Lecture 1
# 2023-09-25

---

## Module Welcome

Dr Nicholas Outram, Dr Liz Stuart, Chris Tipney

- An engineering-based approach to software development.
- Engineering design process to design, develop, maintain, test and evaluate software.

> Assumption of little or no prior experience <br>
> Problem Solving <br>

- C++

> Don't rely on AI such as Chat GPT.

An Introduction to C & GUI Programming

<u>**C1**</u> <br>
W1 30% Set Exercises <br>
W2 70% "Report"-ish

> Average score of 40% to pass the module

- Lectures 2 hours
- Labs 2 hours (2 sessions)
- Self Study 8 hours

- Monday 11am
- Thursday 9am (SWE)

- Tutorial Information
- Experiments
- Coding Challenges
- Staff in Attendance
- WFH

---

## Introduction to C and C++

### Computer Architecture

Sequential Machine, one thing after another (ignoring multi-threading for time being).

**Microcomputers**

All computers are composed of 3 major sections
- CPU
- Memory (RAM/ROM)
- IO

One byte is 8 binary bits
- 3.3v or 0v, ON or OFF

- Data movement
- Arithmetic and Logical Operations
- Flow Control

### Layers of Abstraction

Physical Hardware
- CPU, Memory, Storage, Interface

BIOS + Operating System Kernel + Drivers

OS Environment (Shell)

Native Application, Native Libraries
- Compiled, C++

Non-Native Application
- Runtime/Interpreted, .NET, JS, Python (Uses or Invokes Native Applications or Libraries) 

### Machine Code and Assembly

Computers ONLY understand machine code.
- ARM
- Intel
- PowerPC
- ATMEL
- etc.

> Hard to write and non-portable.

Assembly language
- Maps directly to machine code
- Highly efficient in speed and size
- Not platform independent
    - Every CPU has its own assembly langauge
- Hard to program and maintain
- Used for *very* low level tasks

<br>

- Write C-Code
- Compile 
- Assemble
- Link
- Execute

```cpp
#include <stdio.h>

int main()
{
    puts("Hello COMP1000");
    puts("**************");
}
```
```
Hello COMP1000
**************
```

> Build, <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>Shift</kbd>+<kbd>B</kbd>

> Set breakpoints for debugging

### Datatypes

`char`
`unsigned char`
`short`
`unsighed short`
`int`
`unsigned int`
`long`
`unsigned long`
`long long`
`unsigned long long`
`float`
`double`
`long double`
`void`

```cpp
int x;
x = 10;
```

```cpp
long y;
y = 300E6; // 300x10^6
```

Creating a variable reserves storage space at a location in memory. The variable type determines the size and layout in memory.

```cpp
char c = 127;
```
```cpp
short x = 4660;
```

Address | Symbol | Value (8 bit)
--- | --- | ---
0   |     |
1   |     |
2   |     |
3   |     |
4   | c   | 127
5   |     |
... |     |
10  | x   | 18
11  |     | 52
... |     |

> (18 * 256) + 52 = 4660

`c` refers to the value `127` <br>
`&c` refers to the memory address `4`

```cpp
int main(void)
{
    unsigned char num = 42;
    printf("The character code for %d is %c\n", num, num);

    return 0;
}
```
```
The character code 42 is displayed as *
```

```cpp
unsigned char ch1 = '*';
unsigned char ch2 = 42;
// ch1 == ch2
```

`sizeof()`

### Building C++ from Terminal

```
C:\Users\richa\Desktop\learning\learning-uni\COMP1000\HelloWorld\HelloWorld>g++ HelloWorld.cpp -o HelloWorld

C:\Users\richa\Desktop\learning\learning-uni\COMP1000\HelloWorld\HelloWorld>HelloWorld.exe
Hello COMP1000
**************
Hello world
```

## Using GitHub to obtain and maintain your own fork of the notes

> Version Control System (VCS)

[Forked Plymouth University Software Engineering Repository](https://github.com/corey-richardson/SoftwareEngineering)

> `upstream` - original copy <br>
> `downstream` - my copy

To 'update' from the upstream copy:

> This branch is 'n' commit/s behind UniversityOfPlymouthComputing:main

`git fetch upstream` <br>
`git pull`

## An Introduction to C and GUI Programming

> Chapter 2 and Chapter 9 of An Introduction to C & GUI Programming

### Chapter 2 - Variables and Arithmetic

To use a variable in C/C++, you must first declare it's type. This allows the correct sized block of memory to be allocated (`malloc`).

If a variable is left unassigned after declaration, it may contain a garbage value where that block of memory has been used before and 'forgotten'. Before reading the value from a variable and using it in a calculation, you must assign it a new value.

You can assign multiple variables *of the same type* on a single line using comma-seperators.
```c++
int a, b = 2, c = 3;
```

For one value to multiple variables, do:
```c++
int x, y, z;
x = y = z = 50;
```

`float` - number with a decimal point
```c++
float a = 19.43;
```

The format specifier for an `int` is `%d`; for a `float` value it is `%f`.
```c++
float a = 2.897;
float b = 3.641;
int c;

c = a + b; // float + float is casted to an int here
printf("The sum of %f and %f is %d.\n", a, b, c);
```
```
The sum of adding 2.897000 and 3.641000 is 6.
```
> `6.538` is casted to an `int`, so the precision after the decimal point is dropped. <br>
> If you change the declaration of `int c;` to `float c;` and use the format specifier `%f` the program will output the correct value.

The degree of precision can be changed by putting a decimal point and the number of decimal places to display between the `%f` format specifier.
```c++
#include <stdio.h>

int main()
{
    float a = 2.897;
    printf("a to 1 decimal place is %.1f", a);
    return 0;
}

```
```
a to 1 decimal place is 2.9
```


**Syntactic Sugar**

- `a = a + 1` --> `a++` (increment `a` by `1`)
- `a = a + n` --> `a += n` (increment `a` by `n`)
- `a = a * n` --> `a *= n` (multiply `a` by `n`)

### Chapter 9 - User Input